Central tendency helps us identify the center or middle of our data.
There are three ways we usually measure this:
the mean, the median, and the mode.
Let's draw 5 random cards.
Let's say we get a 2, a 3, a 7, a 10 and a Queen
In cards, a Jack counts as 11, Queen counts as 12 and the King is 13
The mean, also known as the average, is calculated by adding up all these
numbers and then dividing by the number of data points;
which is 5, since there are five total cards.
So, if we add 2, 3, 7, 10 and 12, we get 34,
dividing by 5 means our mean value is 6.8.
Now, let's look at median.
Median is the middle number in a sorted list of numbers.
After rearranging our cards in ascending order,
we can see our median value here is 7
as it is the number in the middle of this sorted list of cards.
But what if we had an extra card, how exactly do we find the middle?
Just take the two middle numbers, add them up, and divide by 2.
Lastly, lets talk about the mode.
The mode is the number that appears most frequently in our data.
If we drew an extra 7 for example, well that would make our mode seven.
You can have more than one mode.
In this specific example, we happen to have four threes and four Kings.
Here we can see we have two modes, so we can say it is bimodal.
To summarize, mean, median and mode are all measures of central tendency.
They each tell us something about the middle of our data.
These measures can give us different information
and depending on our data we might choose to use one over the others.